---
layout: single
title:
  'Reality Check: The Best Available Bionic Arms Are Still Just Barely Usable'
date: 2022-03-01 12:00:00 -0000
categories: bionics amputee-resources
excerpt:
  Not only are today's bionics not even close to as good as an intact human
  limb, they're usually less functional than just wearing nothing at all.

header:
  image: /assets/images/headers/resources.jpg
  alt:
    My bionic arm, laid palm-up on a white background. The socket is textured
    with a carbon fiber wrap, and the palm is smooth and black with a hexagonal
    webbing between thumb and index finger. Just out of focus, the COAPT control
    button and power plate are embedded in the arm.
---

_TL;DR We're making steady progress on bionic arms, but people seem to vastly
overestimate the capabilities and performance of current devices. Not only are
today's bionics not even close to as good as an intact human limb, they're
usually less functional than just wearing nothing at all._

{: .notice--info}

_A note on bias: I'm speaking as a congenital transradial (below the elbow)
amputee. YMMV for amputations at different levels. Also, I use the term
'bionics' throughout to describe myoelectric arms--this is to match popular
parlance._

Whenever I post a video of me training with my bionic arm (more specifically, my
myoelectric prosthesis), I always get some variation of the same remarks in the
comments section:

> It's so amazing that bionics have come so far from those creepy hook hands.
> We're living in the future!

> Which is more effective at this point, your real hand or your bionic one? What
> tasks do you still use your real hand for, if any?

> You control it with your brain, right? I saw that on TV!

> I'm so jealous. I'd totally replace one of my arms with a bionic one. Soon!

Don't get me wrong--I'm excited for the future, too. I'm an amputee, and I work
on open-source bionics, so I'm clearly pretty invested in the progression of the
technology. And it _has_ progressed a decent amount, incrementally, in the last
few decades. But tech enthusiasts are quick to get defensive when I try to bring
us back to Earth.

I want to state here, for the record:

{: style="font-size: 1.5rem"}

For amputees like me, even the best commercially available bionic limbs are
barely usable for real day-to-day wear, and almost half of all users end up
rejecting them.

We've made a lot of advancements since I put on my first myo device twenty-five
years ago, but we're not anywhere close to a hand that is anything better than a
_crude, clunky approximation of a human limb._

The [hand I use currently](/resources/#my-arm) is much better than anything I've
used before--in fact, _I consider mine to be the best you can possibly get
today_. I also consider myself to be a fairly skilled user, and I _still_ go
without mine most of the day--it's too much of a hindrance.

I think overestimation of modern bionics' capabilities comes from a few
different places:

1. The dramatic _cosmetic_ overhaul of myoelectric arms that "disguised" (not
   necessarily on purpose) what is actually very _incremental_ progress in the
   underlying tech
2. Over-hype of experimental results in science journalism (definitely on
   purpose)
3. Underestimation of amputees' function without prosthetics

But so what, right? People like sci-fi tech and like to stretch reality a little
bit. Problem is, I think _**it's pretty likely the misinformation about these
devices is discouraging amputees who come into this with completely unrealistic
expectations about what it's like to pilot one.**_ Bit strange that the
pop-culture fascination with artificial arms steamrolled right over the people
they're actually made for, and stranger still that no one can comprehend an
amputee not needing or even wanting one given their limitations.

## Myoelectric prostheses' "Cyberpunk Makeover" is mostly surface-level

Very few people will ever actually operate a bionic arm--looking at photos and
posts online is as close as they'll ever get to one. And man, did myoelectric
hands and arms suddenly jump to 2077 in terms of appearance. When I first used
one in the mid-nineties, they looked like this:

![an old myoelectric prosthesis from 1980.](/assets/images/posts/old_myo_arm.jpg){:
.align-center}

{: .text-center style="font-size: 0.5rem"}

Image credit - sciencemuseumgroup.co.uk

The design hadn't changed since 1980. Two sEMG sensors informed a big claw
wrapped in a not-quite-your-skin-color glove that opened and closed. I would
categorize these as "completely unusable in any real capacity."

I always _hated_ using mine as a toddler, and I eventually I ditched it and
didn't look back for around fifteen years. When I checked back in, everything
was different. Gone were the uncanny-valley fleshy colors and rubbery gloves of
old, replaced by slick carbon fiber wraps and composite hands with buttons,
LEDs, and accompanying smartphone apps.

We had decided it was cool to be "part robot" and embraced black and chrome. And
**at some point, we started calling all powered prosthetics "bionics"**, which
is sexier, even though this (admittedly less-than-technical) term looks like it
used to only really apply to osseointegrated (i.e. surgically implanted) devices
or implanted neural interfaces [^1].

Some companies, like Open Bionics, have made a name for themselves by leaning
fully into the aesthetic nature of the devices and developing 3D-printed arms
modeled after video game and movie characters:

![The Adam Jensen Arm from Open Bionics.](/assets/images/posts/adam-jensen-arm.jpg){:
.align-center}

{: .text-center style="font-size: 0.5rem"}

Image credit - Augmented Future

Of course, many of these changes aren't _just_ for show. Carbon fiber _is_
stronger and lighter than older composite materials, and the blinky lights and
cute beeps _do_ indicate different modes and settings. And hey, Bluetooth
connectivity! These are certainly non-trivial improvements in terms of _product
design._

But underlying it all, **the fundamental technology in new myoelectric "bionic"
arms is usually the exact same as that of the older prosthetics**--a single or
dual-site sEMG sensor that tells the hand to open and close (unless you're using
a pattern recognition system, like
[COAPT Control](https://coaptengineering.com/), which I do, but most don't). The
chips are smaller, the sensors a bit better tuned, and the actuators higher
quality, but once again, those are _incremental_ improvements. Most importantly,
these differences don't change the answer to the fundamental question:

{: style="font-size: 1.5rem"}

_Will amputees put them on, use them, and **keep** using them?_

The answer is still "No" more often than you'd think. Up to 38% of upper-limb
amputees (ULAs) end up rejecting their prosthetic devices[^2]. That number is
for all types of devices across all amputation levels, so maybe the new new
devices have improved things, right?

No. **The rejection rate for new bionics is actually higher than the
average--44% of all device recipients give up and stop using them[^3].**

How could this be? In some more detail:

## Bionic arms are less functional than simple cable-driven systems

Yes, you read that right. People don't believe this one since we're all so
focused on the future. But in terms of weight, reliability, feedback, and
function (not to mention cost), almost nothing beats the trusty body-powered
system, driven by what is basically a bicycle brake cable.

I blame a lot of the misinformation on the way "inspiring" tech articles frame
the different types of prosthetics as a purely linear progression of form and
function. They always lay it out the same way:

1. **The past** - Dark days. We used to use crude hooks with no electronics.
2. **The present** - We're living in exciting times! electronic arms are here,
   and we can ditch the hooks, thank _God._ Amputees can finally start living,
   and look how we're _changing the lives of children!_
3. **The future** - Implants and brain interfaces and you can replace your
   healthy arm for a bionic one, too!

But in reality:

### Advanced bionics keep losing to body-powered prosthetics in competitions

Ever heard of the [Cybathlon](https://cybathlon.ethz.ch/en)? It's a pretty new
competition, a sorta part-athletics-event-part-tech-expo, with races in
categories ranging from powered wheelchairs to exoskeletons to brain-computer
interfaces to--you guessed it--prosthetic arms.

Any type of prosthetic, bionic or otherwise, is allowed. And in 2016, with
dozens of teams competing with the newest bionic arms from all over the world,
_the decisive winner was a man wielding a simple body-powered hook[^5]_.

![Bob Radocy, winner of the 2016 Cybathlon, holding his medal with his prosthetic.](/assets/images/posts/cybathlon_2016.jpg){:
.align-center}

{: .text-center style="font-size: 0.5rem"}

Image credit - TRS News

And in case you were thinking it was a fluke, the same thing happened in 2020: a
3D-printed, cable-driven arm ([Maker Hand](https://www.makerhand.com/), if
you're interested) smoked the competition by 58 seconds. His total race time was
~5:30, to give you an idea of his lead:

{% include video id="NHlaAaVwyz0?start=355" provider="youtube" %}

The most frustrating thing is, even if you were aware of the event and read the
news coverage, you probably wouldn't have noticed this. The
[BBC article](https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-37605984) about Cybathlon 2016
_first completely mischaracterizes the contestants as all using robotic arms,
because that's what's interesting:_

> Arm amputees used robotic prosthetic arms featuring hands in all shapes and
> sizes.

then completely glosses over the upset in the results and proceeds to simply
grab a quote about the "next step" in bionics technology:

> "The next challenge is the touch sensitive nature of the fingers," said Martin
> Wallace, development manager for Steeper, one of the companies producing
> robotic hands.

Maybe the actual next step would be to examine how their robotic arm lost to
some printed plastic parts and a brake cable worth around $50.

{: style="font-size: 1.5rem"}

Any news or tech journalism that features prosthetics is, first and foremost,
meant to "inspire" non-amputees and make them feel hopeful for the future. But
if rule #1 is "be inspirational", you can't really have honest coverage of
prosthetics, can you?

### Real bionics usage is clumsier than you'd expect

Did you ever notice that it's tough to find video footage of people performing
anything but the most basic tasks with their bionic arms? The internet is full
to the brim of prosthetics "inspiration porn": bionics unboxing experiences,
delighted faces (often of children for extra emotional appeal), and quick demos
of something as trivial as picking up a ball or cup and putting it back down.
Maybe they don't even pick up anything--they'll just open and close the hand a
few times.

To me, the reason why is pretty simple--bionics still have quite a bit of
trouble doing anything more than the simple stuff.

The Grablab at Yale finally went out and collected hours of video footage of
bionics users performing _real, everyday tasks, outside of a lab setting._ And
the results aren't pretty:

{% include video id="9GekSXq2OJs" provider="youtube" %}

As elaborated on in the accompanying paper[^4], they found that:

- **Myoelectric arms only got used for 19% of daily activities.** By comparison,
  simple body-powered devices were used 28% of the time. By that metric, bionic
  arms spend more time as dead weight.
- When the myo arms _were_ used, **only 30% of the object manipulations users
  performed were prehensile** (as in, opening and closing their devices around
  objects as they're designed to do). Much more frequently, they nudge and push
  objects with their closed hands or hooks, hang things off the arm, or wedge
  them between arm and trunk. That means _for 70% of the usage of bionic arms,
  the advanced multi-articulating hands and accompanying control systems are
  completely superfluous._ You can see their hesitation when trying to perform
  prehensile manipulations--they don't actually trust the devices.

## Twenty-three grips, and still nothing to watch

One of the biggest mechanical advancements made with new myoelectric hands is a
steep ramp-up in the complexity of their articulation. Instead of a single
open-close grip, modern multi-articulating hands often have a dozen or more
pre-set grips representing different hand positions. My TASKA hand has 23,
ranging from pincer to tripod to handshake to sphere grip to "silly" ones like
the heavy metal horns.

What this actually means is: _instead of simply failing to pick up an
irregularly shaped object, I can now fail to pick it up a bunch of different
ways_! More grips don't really translate into improved function, and I've only
found two or three of them to be useful.

## Myoelectrics aren't really "mind controlled" the way you think

Sure, you can call them that, but then everything you do is mind-controlled,
isn't it? If I place a quarter on my arm, and twitch my bicep until it slides
off, did I move the quarter with my mind? Not really. Myoelectrics are
_muscle-controlled._

_Muscles_ are mind-controlled, and you have to move an existing part of your
body, i.e. twitch the muscle under the sensor, for the arm to activate. Really
they're just listening to voltage changes that your body movement creates. It
may seem like I'm splitting hairs, but to me it seems like a pretty meaningful
difference. That intermediate step, coupled with the sensor placement on the
skin _outside_ the body, introduces a huge amount of noise.

Yet journalists love to conflate the two. In a
[Healthline article](https://www.healthline.com/health-news/future-prosthetics-might-be-this-mind-controlled-bionic-arm#Heres-how-conventional-prostheses-work)
about a _true_ neural interface, the author writes this about myoelectrics:

> Prsic says like the new mind-controlled osseointegrated limbs, the myoelectric
> prosthesis is more or less also mind-controlled. The brain sends an electrical
> signal to the nerves and muscles, which is then transferred to the prosthesis.

In their popular video
[5 Futuristic Mind-Controlled Prosthetics](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JuLRBcW8DsY),
_Tech Vision_ lumps the Open Bionics Hero Arm, a simple myoelectric hand, in the
same category as brain implants and neural interfaces, saying it gives the user
an "unrivaled lifelike sensation." In addition to being a complete
mischaracterization of decades-old, clunky EMG tech, the statement also implies
the existence of transferring touch or feeling to the user (which, of course, it
doesn't). In reality the only novel thing about the Hero Arm is that it's
3D-printed.

Even the [Atom Limb](https://atomlimbs.com/), based on IP[^7] from the
DARPA-funded LUKE/DEKA arm (which _is_ undoubtedly a huge step forward), boasts
"mind control" in its literature, with the tagline "Just think and it
moves"[^8]. Yet they also mention there are no implants, and they recommend an
outpatient functional enhancement surgery to ensure signal fidelity. That
surgery is almost certainly
[TMR](https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/plastic_reconstructive_surgery/services-appts/tmr.html),
meant to improve myoelectric control in amputees, meaning this is also probably
myoelectric device, just with higher resolution.

## Experimental prosthetics' level of function should be treated skeptically until they are widespread

I'm not saying neural interfaces aren't the future of the technology--they
probably are. But _the awesome mind-controlled prosthetics you see on the news
aren't even close to available_. I wouldn't blame you if you thought otherwise:
in a report on three (3) Swedish patients trying out the e-OPRA neural
interfacing arm, Science Daily thought an appropriate headline was
_[Mind-controlled arm prostheses that 'feel' are now a part of everyday life.](https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/04/200430110321.htm)_

Here's some footage of arms that use a new type of neural interface, based on
signal amplification from grafted muscle, out of the University of Michigan that
boasts intuitive, finger-level control:

{% include video id="PoKcRtDmKJw?start=64" provider="youtube" %}

The users say the hand is great, and I believe them. At the same time, the
"intuitive, finger-level control" isn't _really_ on display in this video--they
demo a few different types of grips that I could perform just as well with my
myoelectric hand. The scientific community obviously wouldn't let them fabricate
their results, so I _do_ believe the technology allows for finger-level control.
This is probably a result of the users having limited time to try the device.
Still, why get hyped before you see it proven?

The absolute best demos I've seen have been those from the
[Modular Prosthetic Limb](https://www.jhuapl.edu/Prosthetics/ResearchMPL) out of
Johns Hopkins, which would make sense given the project's $120MM price tag.
What's most compelling here is the sheer number of degrees of freedom (DOF) on
display, since the user is missing hand, wrist, elbow, and shoulder. Controlling
all of that requires 26 DOF:

{% include video id="KPhkVPNKtVA?start=420" provider="youtube" %}

And this is without the user even being allowed to take the arms home to
practice! However, the MPL is a _research platform_, and in the video, a
researcher mentions they need to reduce the cost 10x and go through several more
years of hoops to make things commercially feasible (though the video is seven
years old by now).

When these types of arms first release commercially, they aren't necessarily
going to be orders of magnitude more functional than what we have now, even if
long-term they will certainly have the most potential. There's a long road
ahead.

Remember the Cybathlon I mentioned earlier? Two of the contestants were using
the
[e-OPRA system](https://integrum.se/what-we-do/our-products-future-solutions/e-opra/),
a revolutionary, history-making, _Earth-shattering_ two-way neural interface
with implanted electrodes that also transmit the feeling of touch to the user.
Everyone agrees: this is truly a whole new _totally unprecedented_ level of
prosthetic control

How'd they do? **They finished in 3rd and 6th, losing to the $50 hand with the
brake cable**[^9]. Surely their experience with their new limbs _is_ much more
intuitive, but just how much does that matter if it doesn't translate to being
able to use it more effectively?

_(That's an open question for discussion. For acquired amputees who lost their
limbs later in life, it probably matters a lot. For congenital amputees like me
who never had a hand, it doesn't really matter at all.)_

## "Something" isn't better than "nothing"

At this point in the piece, I expect a question like:

> Okay, so the awesome mind-controlled devices aren't ready yet. Even if the
> myoelectric hands aren't perfect, at least they're something. How else are you
> going to live a normal life?

But we're not comparing against zero here. _Transradial amputees like myself
have a very high level of function that basically approaches that of a
two-handed person_. So actually, the threshold for being "better than no
prosthesis" is super high.

As an example, with no prosthesis on I can type >100 word per minute:

{% include embed_tt id="6978864650305670405" %}

But with one on, I can hardly type at all. It makes sense--typing requires a
high degree of speed and dexterity, which is exactly what bionics are bad at.
But if you work an office job and are at the keyboard all day, then in the
evenings blow off steam by, say, playing video games (using a game controller
requires similar dexterity), then _when exactly are you going to wear the hand?_

People have this idea that amputees need to be "fixed" with technology so they
can live a "normal life". This sentiment has been cultivated by years of style
media coverage where a "helpless" child loses their arm but is "saved" by
technology. The term "changing lives" is always attached. But my life has never
been changed by a prosthesis, and _we're already thriving the way we are_.
Prosthetics are going to have to get really, _really_ good to meaningfully
improve our function, and that's probably a few decades away.

## Sky-high Expectations are Scaring off Potential Bionics Users

Here's why any of this matters. _If you're an amputee these days, there's
overwhelming pressure to have a sick-nasty bionic limb and be a "cyborg"._ And
if you _don't_ have one, it must be because you're waiting for insurance to
approve one, right? After all, "it's amazing what they can do now."

So you go to the doctor and shell out thousands of dollars, which may be
completely straining your finances, but it's worth it because you're getting a
new bionic arm, and it's _mind controlled_! And then it finally arrives, and
_you feel more disabled wearing it than before you had it._ It can't really pick
things up like you thought, and your arm, which used to pick things up just fine
with no hand, is now stuffed inside a socket where it can't feel or do much of
anything.

Eventually, the bionic device ends up in the closet and collects dust, which
isn't very cool or Cyberpunk at all. Then you have to face everyone to whom you
excitedly mentioned the new arm and tell them that it doesn't actually work that
well, but _they're consuming all the same bionics hype content as you_ and still
believe we're in the future, so to them you must not be using it right, or you
just _gave up._

I'm not the only one who thinks this. Though these takes are rarely published, I
found one really good article
(["I have one of the most advanced prosthetic arms in the world--and I hate it"](https://www.inputmag.com/culture/cyborg-chic-bionic-prosthetic-arm-sucks),
_Input Magazine_) that spells out all my same frustrations. There's also a
really good write-up from
[99% Invisible](https://99percentinvisible.org/episode/the-lows-of-high-tech/)
about it.

I've also made other videos talking about this in greater detail:

{% include embed_ig id="CSEihiwnwTX" %}

Anecdotally, though, the sentiment among upper-extremity amputees isn't rare at
all. Almost every UEA I know has expressed annoyance at myoelectric arms and
ambivalence regarding the explosion of hype surround Cyborg Chic and bionics.

## "But you use a bionic arm!"

I just spent a long time talking about why today's bionic arms aren't that good.
But I do own one, and I make lots of content explaining how it works to people.
Am I a big hypocrite?

Well, maybe. But I justify my role here a few ways:

1. **Bionics need device pilots** - if people don't wear them and provide
   feedback, we're going nowhere fast. How are we supposed to tell what's
   impossible with current technology vs what's just difficult? Who's writing
   the guide book for intermediate and advanced bionics usage? As an amputee and
   a wearable robotics engineer, I'm a pretty good spot to work with the
   engineering teams behind hands and control systems.
2. **Legitimate use cases _do_ come up** - usually they involve situations where
   I need to hold multiple things, and pinning them against my body like I
   normally would doesn't cut it. Two I've noticed have been at buffet style
   restaurants (the bane of an amputee's existence), where you need to balance
   plates and glasses or risk spilling food everywhere, and at the airport where
   dragging my luggage too close to my body makes it bounce off my feet every
   time I step. It may seem indulgent to have a bionic arm for such niche uses,
   but also:
3. **My insurance covered it** - so what the heck?

I try to perform _real, active practice_ with the arm every day or every couple
days. But the vast majority of the time, I'm all natural. When easily available
bionic devices can actually deliver a significant increase in my function, maybe
I'll switch things up.

-N

[^1]:
    [Guinness World Records, "First Bionic Arm"](https://www.guinnessworldrecords.com/news/60at60/2015/8/1993-first-bionic-arm-392887)

[^2]:
    [Update on Advances in Upper Extremity Prosthetics](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0363502311009890)

[^3]:
    [Current rates of prosthetic usage in upper-limb amputees - have innovations had an impact on device acceptance?](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33377803/)

[^4]:
    [Quantifying Prosthetic and Intact Limb Use in Upper Limb Amputees via Egocentric Video: An Unsupervised, At-Home Study](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9399633)

[^5]:
    [Bob Radocy Wins the 2016 Cybathlon](https://www.trsprosthetics.com/cybathlon-winner-bob-radocy/)

[^6]:
    [Cybathlon: Battle of the bionic athletes](https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-37605984)

[^7]: [Research, Atom Limbs](https://atomlimbs.com/research)
[^8]: [Atom Limb Touch](https://atomlimbs.com/touch)
[^9]: [Cybathlon 2020 Results](https://cybathlon.ethz.ch/en/teams/x-opra)
